pgstream webhooks blog (#304)
xataio/mdx-blog: webhooks-with-pgstream.mdx

---
title: 'Postgres webhooks with pgstream'
description: 'A simple tutorial for calling webhooks on Postgres data and schema changes using pgstream.'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgstream/introducing-pgstream@2x.jpg
  alt: pgstream
author: Tudor Golubenco
authorEmail: tudor@xata.io
date: 08-27-2024
tags: ['postgres', 'fpPgstream', 'oss', 'open-source']
published: true
slug: postgres-webhooks-with-pgstream
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgstream/introducing-pgstream@2x.jpg
---

> [pgstream](https://github.com/xataio/pgstream) is a CDC (Change-Data-Capture) tool focused on PostgreSQL. Among other [things](https://github.com/xataio/pgstream?tab=readme-ov-file#features), it can be used to call webhooks whenever there is a data (or schema) change in a Postgres database. This means that whenever a row is inserted, updated, or deleted, a webhook is called with the data from the row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[pgstream](https://github.com/xataio/pgstream) is a CDC (Change-Data-Capture) tool focused on PostgreSQL. Among other [things](https://github.com/xataio/pgstream?tab=readme-ov-file#features), it can be used to call webhooks whenever there is a data (or schema) change in a Postgres database. This means that whenever a row is inserted, updated, or deleted, or a table is created, altered, truncated or deleted, a webhook is notified of the relevant event details.
```

> In this article we're going to dive in the pgstream webhooks functionality, including more advanced topics, like sending the old and new values, TOAST support, and schema changes support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article we're going to dive into the pgstream webhooks functionality, including more advanced topics, like sending the old and new values, TOAST support, and schema changes support.
```

![Postgres webhooks with pgstream](/images/pgstream-webhooks.png)

## Preparation

For this tutorial we need a Postgres instance that has logical replication enabled and the [wal2json](https://github.com/eulerto/wal2json) output plugin loaded. There are a number of ways to do this, but we're going to use the [docker-compose file](https://github.com/xataio/pgstream/blob/main/build/docker/docker-compose.yml) from the pgstream repo:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/xataio/pgstream.git
```

And then start the Postgres instance:

```sh
docker compose -f build/docker/docker-compose.yml up db
```

Then, in a new terminal window, you can connect to it and create a simple table to play with:

```sh
psql "postgres://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/postgres"
```

At the psql prompt:

```sql
CREATE TABLE users(id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY, name TEXT, role TEXT);
```

> Let's now install `pgstream`. One option is to build it from source, since we already have the repo cloned:

Reviewer: We can also use `go install github.com/xataio/pgstream@latest`.
Maybe we can link to the readme here:
https://github.com/xataio/pgstream/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#installation

Author: Thanks, replaced the homebrew part with a link to the installation instructions.

```sh
go build
```

The above assumes you have Go installed. If you don't, it might be easier to use the Homebrew tap:

```sh
brew tap xataio/pgstream
brew install pgstream
```

Or you can find pre-built binaries on the [release pages](https://github.com/xataio/pgstream/releases).

Next step is to initialize `pgstream`, like this:

```sh
pgstream init --pgurl "postgres://postgres:postgres@localhost/postgres?sslmode=disable"
```

This creates several tables managed by pgstream, which are grouped in a schema called `pgstream`.

## Configuration

The `pgstream` repo comes with a `pg2webhook.env` configuration file for this purpose. Its contents are:

```sh
# Listener config
PGSTREAM_POSTGRES_LISTENER_URL="postgres://postgres:postgres@localhost?sslmode=disable"

# Processor config
PGSTREAM_TRANSLATOR_STORE_POSTGRES_URL="postgres://postgres:postgres@localhost?sslmode=disable"
PGSTREAM_WEBHOOK_SUBSCRIPTION_STORE_URL="postgres://postgres:postgres@localhost?sslmode=disable"
PGSTREAM_WEBHOOK_SUBSCRIPTION_STORE_CACHE_ENABLED=false
PGSTREAM_WEBHOOK_SUBSCRIPTION_STORE_CACHE_REFRESH_INTERVAL="60s"
```

> In this file, there are two Postgres connection strings defined. The first one is for the listener, to which database should pgstream connect and listen for changes. The second one is used as a metadata db to store the registered subscriptions and their configuration. In this example, they are both set to the same database, but you can use different databases or instances if you prefer.

Reviewer: Maybe we can link to the readme configuration here for more details:
https://github.com/xataio/pgstream/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#configuration

> In this file, there are two Postgres connection strings defined. The first one is for the listener, to which database should pgstream connect and listen for changes. The second one is used as a metadata db to store the registered subscriptions and their configuration. In this example, they are both set to the same database, but you can use different databases or instances if you prefer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PGSTREAM_POSTGRES_LISTENER_URL` indicates which database the pgstream listener should connect to. `PGSTREAM_WEBHOOK_SUBSCRIPTION_STORE_URL` is used as a metadata db to store the registered subscriptions and their configuration. In this example, they are both set to the same database, but you can use different databases or instances if you prefer. More details can be found in the [readme configuration section]( https://github.com/xataio/pgstream/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#configuration).
```

You are now ready to start `pgstream` like this:

```sh
pgstream run -c pg2webhook.env
```

## The webhooks listener

> We now have pgstream ready to go, but we need something to receive the webhooks. Let's use this simple python program (courtesy of ChatGPT) to start a webserver that logs all the requests it receives:

Reviewer: It might be worth mentioning there is a webhook dummy server in the pgstream repository. It can be useful to have something readily available, and it can serve as a template to iterate on a custom implementation.
https://github.com/xataio/pgstream/blob/main/tools/webhook/webhook_server.go

Author: The reason for which I went with the python server is that the Go one didn't print the JSON as is, but rather the decoded messages. And I wanted to show the JSONs.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I was wondering why the example is in Python, it built the pgstream with Go, I somehow assumed examples will follow in Go.

Reviewer: I'm also happy to update the go dummy server to show the json if that helps.

Reviewer 2: I think, it would make the whole thing more coherent 🫶

Reviewer: I have opened a PR with the changes:
https://github.com/xataio/pgstream/pull/64

Author: Awesome, thanks! Incorporated in the blog post.

    def do_POST(self):
        # Parse the length of the data
        content_length = int(self.headers['Content-Length'])

        # Read the data from the request
        post_data = self.rfile.read(content_length)

        # Try to parse the data as JSON
        try:
            json_data = json.loads(post_data)
            pretty_json = json.dumps(json_data, indent=4)
            print("Received Webhook:")
            print(pretty_json)
        except json.JSONDecodeError:
            print("Received non-JSON data:")
            print(post_data.decode('utf-8'))

        # Send a response back to the webhook sender
        self.send_response(200)
        self.send_header('Content-Type', 'text/plain')
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b'Webhook received')

def run(server_class=http.server.HTTPServer, handler_class=WebhookHandler, port=9910):
    server_address = ('', port)
    httpd = server_class(server_address, handler_class)
    print(f'Starting server on port {port}...')
    httpd.serve_forever()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    run()
```

You can start it like this:

```sh
python3 webhooks_server.py

Starting server on port 9910...
```

> Now we have to create a subscription so that `pgstream` knows to send the webhook to `localhost:9910` where the `webhook_server.go` program is waiting. We do this by calling an API which the webhook module from `pgstream` serves:

Reviewer: Here maybe we should explain that we can create subscriptions for any table in a schema, or for all schemas in a database by leaving those fields empty. The same applies to the `event_types`, if none are provided, any event type will trigger a notification, but we can specify the event type (`I`, `U`,`D` or `T`) if we only care about some of them.

Author: Added a Note with these two points. Can you review that part, please?

      {
        "id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-1",
        "name": "id",
        "type": "integer",
        "value": 1
      },
      {
        "id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-2",
        "name": "name",
        "type": "text",
        "value": "Dwight Schrute"
      },
      {
        "id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-3",
        "name": "role",
        "type": "text",
        "value": "Assistant Regional Manager"
      }
    ],
    "identity": null,
    "metadata": {
      "schema_id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdig",
      "table_pgstream_id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0",
      "id_col_pgstream_id": ["cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-1"],
      "version_col_pgstream_id": ""
    }
  }
}
```

Things to note in the above:

- The "action" is `I` for "insert".
- The LSN (Log Sequence Number) is included. This is a unique and sorted value generated by Postgres, which you can use to order the events in case they are processed out of order.
- Each column is included with their name, type, new value, and an ID generated by pgstream (e.g. `cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-2` for the `name` column). This ID is unique for each column and can be used to follow columns across renames.

## Updates

Now let's run an update statement:

```sql

> UPDATE users SET role='Assistant to the Regional Manager' WHERE name='Dwight Schrute';

Reviewer: haha great!

    "table": "users",
    "columns": null,
    "identity": [
      {
        "id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-1",
        "name": "id",
        "type": "integer",
        "value": 1
      },
      {
        "id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-2",
        "name": "name",
        "type": "text",
        "value": "Dwight Schrute"
      },
      {
        "id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-3",
        "name": "role",
        "type": "text",
        "value": "Assistant Regional Manager"
      },
      {
        "id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-4",
        "name": "last_name",
        "type": "text",
        "value": null
      }
    ],
    "metadata": {
      "schema_id": "cr2r0lvjc0j00h93rdn0",
      "table_pgstream_id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0",
      "id_col_pgstream_id": ["cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-1"],
      "version_col_pgstream_id": ""
    }
  }
}
```

To note:

- The "action" key is set to `D`, for "delete"
- The full row is included in the `identity` object. That is because we have the replicate identity set to FULL, otherwise only the PK would have been included.

## Large values / TOAST

Setting the replica identity to full accomplishes one more thing: it includes the large values in the webhook events.

> Postgres values over the page size (commonly 8k, after compression) are stored separately from the main table data in [TOAST storage](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/storage-toast.html). This means they also not included in the logical replication events by default, unless they are changed by the current UPDATE statement. This is a gotcha: you are expecting all columns to always be present, but once they reach a certain size they will be missing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Postgres values over the page size (commonly 8k, after compression) are stored separately from the main table data in [TOAST storage](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/storage-toast.html). This means they are also not included in the logical replication events by default, unless they are changed by the current UPDATE statement. This is a gotcha: you are expecting all columns to always be present, but once they reach a certain size they will be missing.
```

        "type": "boolean",
        "value": false
      }
    ],
    "identity": null,
    "metadata": {
      "schema_id": null,
      "table_pgstream_id": "",
      "id_col_pgstream_id": null,
      "version_col_pgstream_id": ""
    }
  }
}
```

The event is more complex, but if you look under the `schema` column value, you see the newly added column:

```json
{
  "name": "first_name",
  "type": "text",
  "unique": false,
  "default": null,
  "metadata": null,
  "nullable": true,
  "pgstream_id": "cr2a0enjc0j00h93rdj0-4"
}
```

Note how you get not only the name and the type of the column, but also metadata information (is nullable, is unique, default value).

Also, the `pgstream_id` value is unique and fixed for this column, regardless of the name. You can verify this by performing a rename:

```sql
ALTER TABLE users RENAME COLUMN first_name TO last_name;
```

## Conclusion

Sending webhooks events from Postgres logical replication events is a non-trivial task, especially if you look at the corner cases and gotchas. However, [pgstream](https://github.com/xataio/pgstream) makes it pretty easy to get a nice, JSON-encoded, and consistent stream of events in the form of webhooks.

> 

Reviewer 2: I feel like writing up a more detailed **Conclusion** usually helps those who first reads the last :) How is something like this: 

```
In this guide, we demonstrated how to set up and trigger webhooks based on data changes in a PostgreSQL database using `pgstream`. We covered the initial setup, webhook configuration, and handling basic operations like inserts, updates, and deletes.

`pgstream` also offers advanced capabilities, such as sending both old and new values during updates and managing schema changes. By integrating `pgstream` into your PostgreSQL environment, you can automate workflows, trigger real-time notifications, and build more responsive applications, whether for data synchronization, auditing, or microservices communication.

```

Author: Nice! incorporated this as is :)
